(upbeat music)
Let's talk about
how to actually run JavaScript.
There's a couple ways we can run JavaScript.
We can run it in the console,
we can run it via node, we can have a script tag,
we can also have an external script.
We'll talk about how we can actually run those.
The simplest is probably just to open up
your dev tools and to go to your console.
And if you wanna run some JavaScript to see how it works,
here what I've done is I've just typed one plus one,
and it returns two.
This is the JavaScript console.
It's a nice way to just quickly noodle on some JavaScript.
If you're trying to figure out how something works,
just pop open a console.
What's cool about that is if you are on
like github.com or any website,
the JavaScript that you type into your console here,
runs on the actual page that is existing.
I could say something like document.querySelectorAll,
and select all the paragraphs on the page.
Don't worry about what this is just yet.
We're gonna learn how to select elements on the page.
But that will return to us every single paragraph
that lives on the page.
The code that runs in your console
is actually running in context of the page that runs here.
You can actually change it if you were to have some
iframes running or if you're also,
like Chrome extensions also have their own console
that you can run things in.
You can change it here.
Very rarely do I actually ever do that though.
So, that's the console.
Nice quick way to noodle on some JavaScript.
Let's move into another way.
Let's go into our playground folder and make a new file.
We'll call that running-js.html.
And I'm just gonna hit...
I have a M extension exclamation mark tab
that will just scaffold out some HTML for us.
And in the body here, we just have a script tag,
and we can console.log, hey.
and what this will do is when the HTML is loaded,
it's going to say, Oh, this is a script tag.
I am changing languages from HTML over to JavaScript.
And it's gonna run any code that is inside of the open
in this closing script tag as JavaScript.
So if I were to go ahead and open this up in my browser,
and I open up my console here, you see that it says,
hey, is console dot logged.
We'll understand what console log is, again,
just don't sweat this too much.
We will be going over it.
And then there is, it shows us that it's running on line 12.
Pretty simple stuff.
One thing I do want to say is that it's worth
almost always running your scripts at the end of the,
just before the closing body tag.
So if I were to go here and have a paragraph tag that says,
hey, and I were to try to select that element,
so const paragraph is equal to
document dot query selector.
And we'll select the paragraph
and then console.log the paragraph.
And when I refresh this,
you see that we actually get that paragraph element.
Now if I were to put that script tag above the paragraphs
or I put the paragraph below the script tag,
and I were to just refresh that page,
you see that we get null which means that it found nothing.
And that's because, in order for your script tag
to access the elements on the page,
the elements must first be on the page
before you select them.
So if we try to select something that doesn't yet exist,
cause it gets created later,
then we won't have access to it.
So I'll talk about a couple different options
in just a second, but just for your own sanity's sake,
just always put your JavaScript
right before the closing body tag
and that's going to help you a whole lot.
We'll talk a little bit more about loading and, and whatnot,
in some future videos when we to get
a little bit more into the DOM,
and that will that be how we can run it.
Another way that we can do is
via a external JavaScript file.
So if I were to go into my playground
and make a sum dot JS, and this is a dot JS file,
and in here console dot log, I'm in another file,
And I can go in here now and give myself a script tag
with a source attribute.
You do not need a type attribute until we hit modules.
So sometimes you may see like a type is equal to,
I don't know, like text forward slash JavaScript in there.
That's not necessary unless we're actually doing modules.
So you can omit that, you simply just need the source.
And then you need to give it a relative path.
So dot forward slash, and then give it sum dot JS.
Because the HTML file is in a folder
where the sibling is sum dot JS.
So dot forward slash means in this folder,
if I were to do dot dot, that would mean go up a level
In our case, it's in the same folder,
and then we give it a relative path
to the JavaScript that's running.
Now if I were to rerun that it says I'm in another file.
It actually shows us where the JavaScript had been run.
And if you click that,
it will show us the actual JavaScript.
We'll go more into this when we hit debugging.
Again, if you were to put the script,
I know sometimes you think,
especially like WordPress plugins love to do this.
If you put the script tag in the head, it will still work.
You see, it still says I'm in another file,
but if we were to try to select some things on the page,
so const p is equal to document dot query selector.
Now when I refresh it, you see we have null.
Why, because of the same reason, the script will run
before the actual HTML is finished building on the page.
Now there are some options.
There are async and a defer attributes
that you can add to your script tag
that will delay the actual running of the JavaScript,
it will download it synchronously and then run it
once the HTML has been loaded on the page.
But that's a much more advanced topic
that we'll get into when we hit async.
We really have to understand what does asynchronous mean
and all of this stuff.
So it's too deep to get into right now.
So we're just going to leave it at that.
Again, put your script tag
right before your closing body tag,
and that's going to give you the best performance
on your website, as well as make sure
that you don't have any headaches that you hit.
Another thing is you might be noticing what is this?
Why is there a closing script tag
if there's nothing inside of here?
That's just a quirk with the script tag.
You cannot self close it like you could many other elements,
like an image tag or an input or something like that.
You do have to have the opening and closing tag
and you cannot put...
Sometimes I see people say console dot log, hey.
I don't think this will work, will it?
No, it doesn't work.
Why?
Because if there is a source attribute on your script tag,
it will actually download and run that JavaScript
and it will ignore any children
that are inside of your actual script tag.
If we take that source attribute off,
then it just reverts back to a regular script tag,
but that's not what we want in our case.
You can have multiple script tags, if you like.
The only downside to that is every single time
that it hits one of these is gonna go off and download it
and parse it for you.
So when we hit modules, we'll look at how can we actually
bundle that into one JavaScript file,
or you can do what's called code splitting,
which is split them into multiple smaller JavaScript files
and have them load on demand.
I believe that's it for running...
Oh, no one more that we have is actually
running it in no JS.
So if I were to make another file
and we'll call that node dash example dot JS.
And here I'll just say console dot log IM from node.
Node JS is JavaScript that can run from the console,
JavaScript that can run in the server.
So instead of running JavaScript
in the context of a website,
we've run it on an actual machine
like many other programming languages do.
And a way that you can do that is you can go here,
and let me see what we got here.
I'm going to go into the playground file
and then we'll see here.
Running JS node example.
So I can run...
We already talked about how you can run node
and then you get a console here,
but you can also just run scripts of JavaScript.
So node, node example dot JS,
and you'll see that that will just run
whatever code is in here and then when it's finished,
it will exit and kick you back to your command prompt there.
So that's the short and skinny of
how to load JavaScript.
We're going to use sort of combination of
running in the console, running in just script tags
and running in external JavaScript files.
Probably for most of your actual production applications,
you are going to be writing in separate JS files,
and likely even in what's called JavaScript modules,
which we're going to get into very later on in this course.